---
layout: nav
title: Recent Updates
category: learn
show_heading: yes
nav: learn

---

## Recent changes

OSv is a new lightweight OS, designed from the ground up to run in a
virtual cloud environment, with maximum performance, low latency, and
simple management.

Recent releases have focused on cloud platform enablement,  performance and
administration.

<!--more-->

## Features

### Capstan
Capstan is a tool for rapidly building and running your application on OSv. Capstan is as simple and fast as using Docker for creating containers, but the result is a complete virtual machine image that will run on any hypervisor with OSv support. A typical Capstan image is very lightweight: only 12-20MB larger than your application itself!

More on Capstan [here](http://osv.io/capstan/)

### REST API

On a cloud environment of multiple instances, interacting with each instance via GUI or CLI is non efficient. Instead OS operations should allows easy automation. The new REST API for OSv will allow such remote automation.

[Swagger](http://developers.helloreverb.com/swagger/) is used to define the REST specification, allowing easy development of client applications and providing  interactive documentation.
The REST API includes the following parts:
* Native HTTP server
* Built-in tool for Swagger API compilation
* UI page for interacting with the API

More on using the API [here](https://github.com/cloudius-systems/osv/wiki/The-RESTful-API)

Latest API specs [here](http://osv.io/api/swagger-ui/dist/index.html)

### Net Channels 
Envisioned by Van Jacobson in 2006, the net channels design radically changes the way an OS handles TCP/IP, in order to take advantage of modern multicore architectures.
The idea, in short, is moving most of the packet processing logic from the kernel to the application context. A minimal packet classifier feeds packet directly to the application socket over “channels”.
The net channel design reduces cache contention and lock contention. In the long term, we expect Net Channels to outperform general OS implementations. 

Original Van Jacobson presentation [here](http://www.lemis.com/grog/Documentation/vj/lca06vj.pdf)

### JVM Balloon
One of the problem with working with the JVM, is that it forces you to set the heap size in advance.
Choose too little and you are hurting your Java app performance.
Choose too much and you are wasting OS resources.
The JVM balloon solves this problem by dynamically exchanging memory between the JVM and OSv, eliminating the need for this manual tuning exercise. 


### ZFS ARC
Added support to allow read-only direct use of ARC buffers on memory mappings, thus avoiding duplication of file data. Write support to ARC buffers is planned. Therefore, writes on file-backed mappings still require the Copy-on-write (COW) approach.

### Driver Enablement
We continue to add more driver alternatives to OSv. 
The latest additions are:

* Advanced Host Controller Interface (AHCI) SATA block driver

* VMW Virtual Network Adaptor (VMXNET3)

More: [OSv driver support](https://github.com/cloudius-systems/osv/wiki/Supported-Drivers)

